
12  SAPPHO, 


SAPPHO.* 

Of  this  great  poetess,  besides  the  immortal  fragment,  and 
the  Hymn  to  Venus,  rendered  familiar  to  the  English  reader 
by  the  versions  of  Ambrose  Philips,  nothing  of  importance 
in  any  degree  commensurate  with  her  fame  has  been  pre- 
served to  us.  As  respects  those  exquisite  reliques,  we 
might  perhaps  have  been  excused  from  adding  to  the  num- 
ber of  attempts  which  have  been  subsequently  made  to  give 
the  English  reader  a  more  correct  impression  of  their  ini- 
mitable beauties.  All  such  endeavours  must  more  or  less 
partake  the  character  of  decided  failures,  since  the  graces 
of  the  original,  principally  residing  in  the  inexpressible 
charm  of  language,  are  of  a  nature  essentially  untrans- 
latable. But,  although  their  chief,  these  are  not  their  only 
excellencies ;  and  that  they  possess  others  which  are  more 
within  the  scope  of  imitation,  may  be  held  a  sufficient  apo- 
logy for  a  new  trial. 

It  remains  to  be  said,  for  the  sake  of  chronological  me- 
thod, that  the  date  assigned  as  that  of  the  sera  at  which 
Sappho  nourished  is  B.C.  610,  more  than  seventy  years 
later  than  Archilochus,  and  fifty  before  Anacreon ;  and  con- 
sequently that  her  reputed  amour  with  the  latter  poet  is  to 
be  classed  among  the  splendid  fictions,  the  "  magnanime 
mensogne"  of  early  romance,  having  perhaps  the  poet  Her- 

*  Sapphonis  Fragmenta.  (Museum  Criticum,  vol.  i.  p.  1.) 


SAPPHO.  33 

mesianax,  who  lived  about  three  hundred  years  after  her, 
for  its  inventor. 

The  only  portions  of  Sappho's  poetry  received  by  Jacobs 
into  his  Anthology  are  three  Epigrams,  neither  of  them  pos- 
sessing any  extraordinary  merit.  The  Ode  and  Fragments 
are  all  excluded,  though  upon  what  principle  of  selection  it 
is  difficult  to  imagine,  since  the  lyrical  fragments  of  other 
ancient  poets  have  been  retained.  The  order  observed  in 
the  following  versions  is  that  of  Bishop  Blomfield,  in  the 
Museum  Criticum,  which  has  been  adoj)ted  for  reference, 
as  exhibiting  the  most  correct,  as  well  as  the  completest, 
edition  of  the  works  of  this  poetess ;  comparing  it,  how- 
ever, with  that  by  Volger  (1810),  as  well  as  with  the  quarto 
by  Wolf,  in  which  last  are  exhibited,  together  with  all  the 
pieces,  genuine  or  apocryphal,  ever  ascribed  to  Sappho,  a 
collection  of  such  poems  and  poetical  passages  of  antiquity 
as  in  any  manner  relate  to  her. 

For  a  lively  criticism  on  the  character,  historical  and 
poetical,  of  this  most  distinguished  person,  the  reader  is  re- 
ferred to  the  article  "On  Greek  Authoresses,"  in  the  Edin. 
Rev.  No.  CIX.  To  attempt,  at  this  time  of  day,  her  vin- 
dication from  aspersions  as  old  at  least  as  the  Augustan 
age,  would  be  the  most  absurd  of  literary  Quixotism.  But, 
so  far  as  unfavourable  inferences  have  been  drawn  from  any 
passages  of  her  writings  now  remaining  to  us,  it  may  in 
fairness  be  asked  whether,  considering  they  are  mere  frag- 
ments, they  amount  to  any  sort  of  evidence ;  since  it  is 
impossible  to  say  whether  the  poetess  is  speaking  in  her 
own  person,  or  in  that  of  some  imaginary  character. 


14  SAPPHO. 


I.     (I.)     HYMN  TO  VENUS. 

Immortal  Venus,  thron'd  above 
In  radiant  beauty  !  Child  of  Jove  ! 
O  skill' d  in  every  art  of  love, 
And  artful  snare ! 

Dread  power,  to  whom  I  bend  the  knee  ! 
Release  my  soul,  and  set  it  free 
From  bonds  of  piercing  agony, 
And  gloomy  care ! 

Yet  come  thyself!  if  e'er,  benign, 
Thy  list'ning  ear  thou  didst  incline 
To  my  rude  lay,  the  starry  shine 
Of  Jove's  court  leaving, 

In  chariot  yok'd  with  coursers  fair, 
Thine  own  immortal  birds,  that  bear 
Thee  swift  to  earth,  the  middle  air 
With  bright  wings  cleaving. 

Soon  they  were  sped — and  thou,  most  blest, 
In  thine  own  smiles  ambrosial  drest, 
Didst  ask  what  griefs  my  mind  oppress' d — 
What  meant  my  song — 

What  end  my  phrensied  thoughts  pursue — 
For  what  lov'd  youth  I  spread  anew 
My  amorous  nets — "  Who,  Sappho,  who 
Hath  done  thee  wrong  ? 


SAPPHO.  15 

What  though  he  fly,  he  '11  soon  return — 
Still  press  thy  gifts,  though  now  he  spurn ; 
Heed  not  his  coldness — soon  he  '11  burn, 
E'en  though  thou  chide." 

— And  saidst  thou  thus,  dread  goddess  ? — O 
Come  then  once  more  to  ease  my  woe ! 
Grant  all ! — and  thy  great  self  bestow, 
My  shield  and  guide  ! 


II.      (2.)      ODE.     Ets  'Epiofjievav.  ] 

Blest  as  th'  immortal  Gods  is  he, 
The  youth  whose  eyes  may  look  on  thee, 
Whose  ears  thy  tongue's  sweet  melody 
May  still  devour ! 

Thou  smilest  too  ? — sweet  smile,  whose  charm 
Has  struck  my  soul  with  wild  alarm, 
And,  when  I  see  thee,  bids  disarm 
Each  vital  power. 

Speechless  I  gaze  :  the  flame  within 
Runs  swift  o'er  all  my  quiv'ring  skin ; 
My  eye-balls  swim  ;  with  dizzy  din 
My  brain  reels  round; 

And  cold  drops  fall ;  and  tremblings  frail 
Seize  every  limb  ;  and  grassy  pale 
I  grow ;  and  then — together  fail 
Both  sight  and  sound ! 


16  SAPPHO, 


FRAGMENTS. 


I.    (3.) 

Planets,  that  round  the  beauteous  moon 

Attendant  wait,  cast  into  shade 
Their  ineffectual  lustres,  soon 
As  she,  in  full-orb'd  majesty  array'd, 
Her  silver  radiance  pours 
Upon  this  world  of  ours. 

