The famous imitation of this ode by Catullus, li., _Ad Lesbiam_--

  Ille mi par esse deo videtur,
  Ille, si fas est, superare divos,
  Qui sedens adversus identidem te
      Spectat et audit
  Dulce ridentem, misero quod omnis
  Eripit sensus mihi: nam simul te,
  Lesbia, aspexi, nihil est super mi
       *    *    *    *    *
  Lingua sed torpet, tenuis sub artus
  Flamma demanat, sonitu suopte
  Tintinant aures, gemina teguntur
      Lumina nocte--

is thus translated by Mr. W. E. Gladstone:--

  Him rival to the gods I place,
    Him loftier yet, if loftier be,
  Who, Lesbia, sits before thy face,
    Who listens and who looks on thee;

  Thee smiling soft. Yet this delight
    Doth all my sense consign to death;
  For when thou dawnest on my sight,
    Ah, wretched! flits my labouring breath.

  My tongue is palsied. Subtly hid
    Fire creeps me through from limb to limb:
  My loud ears tingle all unbid:
    Twin clouds of night mine eyes bedim.


and recently by the late Sir R. F. Burton:--

  Peer of a god meseemeth he,
  Nay, passing gods (an that can be!),
  Who all the while sits facing thee,
        Sees thee and hears
  Thy low sweet laughs which (ah me!) daze
  Mine every sense, and as I gaze
  Upon thee, Lesbia, o'er me strays
       .    .    .    .    .    .
  My tongue is dulled, my limbs adown
  Flows subtle flame; with sound its own
  Rings either ear, and o'er are strown
      Mine eyes with night.

----

  Blest as the immortal gods is he,
  The youth who fondly sits by thee,
  And hears and sees thee all the while
  Softly speak and sweetly smile.

  'Twas this deprived my soul of rest,
  And raised such tumults in my breast;
  For while I gazed, in transport tost,
  My breath was gone, my voice was lost:

  My bosom glowed; the subtle flame
  Ran quick through all my vital frame;
  O'er my dim eyes a darkness hung;
  My ears with hollow murmurs rung.

  In dewy damps my limbs were chilled;
  My blood with gentle horror thrilled;
  My feeble pulse forgot to play;
  I fainted, sank, and died away.
                 AMBROSE PHILIPS, 1711.

  Thy fatal shafts unerring move,
  I bow before thine altar, Love
  I feel thy soft resistless flame
  Glide swift through all my vital frame.

  For while I gaze my bosom glows,
  My blood in tides impetuous flows;
  Hope, fear, and joy alternate roll,
  And floods of transports whelm my soul.

  My faltering tongue attempts in vain
  In soothing murmurs to complain;
  My tongue some secret magic ties,
  My murmurs sink in broken sighs.

  Condemned to nurse eternal care,
  And ever drop the silent tear,
  Unheard I mourn, unknown I sigh,
  Unfriended live, unpitied die.
    SMOLLETT, in _Roderick Random_, 1748.


  Blest as the immortal gods is he,
  The youth whose eyes may look on thee,
  Whose ears thy tongue's sweet melody
      May still devour.
  Thou smilest too?--sweet smile, whose charm
  Has struck my soul with wild alarm,
  And, when I see thee, bids disarm
      Each vital power.
  Speechless I gaze: the flame within
  Runs swift o'er all my quivering skin;
  My eyeballs swim; with dizzy din
      My brain reels round;
  And cold drops fall; and tremblings frail
  Seize every limb; and grassy pale
  I grow; and then--together fail
      Both sight and sound.
                JOHN HERMAN MERIVALE, 1833.


  Peer of gods he seemeth to me, the blissful
  Man who sits and gazes at thee before him,
  Close beside thee sits, and in silence hears thee
        Silverly speaking,
  Laughing love's low laughter. Oh this, this only
  Stirs the troubled heart in my breast to tremble!
  For should I but see thee a little moment,
        Straight is my voice hushed;
  Yea, my tongue is broken, and through and through me
  'Neath the flesh impalpable fire runs tingling;
  Nothing see mine eyes, and a noise of roaring
